Update to open source analytics guide (#7201)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/best-open-source-analytics-tools.md

---
date: 2023-11-22

> title: The 13 best open source analytics tools you can self-host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: The 12 best open source analytics tools you can self-host
```

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - andy-vandervell
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-company-culture-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
  - Open source
  - Comparisons
---

## What are the criteria for this guide?

This guides only includes open-source analytics tools that:

1. Allow users to visualize and analyze behavioral data for products or websites. This includes tools that actively capture data and dashboarding tools that connect to existing data sources, but not data pipeline platforms like Snowplow or Rudderstack. 

> 2. Are actively developed or maintained by a company or community. This is subjectively judged based on recently merged pull requests, commits to their repos, and the responsiveness of the maintainer to review requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Are actively developed or maintained by a company or community.** This is subjectively judged based on recently merged pull requests, commits to their repos, and the responsiveness of the maintainer to review requests.
```

- Event pipelines to integrate with data warehouses
- Built on the ultra-fast ClickHouse OLAP database

#### License and monetization

[PostHog Open Source](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog) is free to use for life and distributed under an MIT license. The open-source version includes the core product analytics, feature flag, and session recording features, but has a one project limit. There's also a [FOSS edition](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog-foss) that removes all proprietary code. 

Subscribing to PostHog Cloud removes the project limit and adds numerous paid-only features, including experimentation, correlation analysis, group analytics for tracking organizations, and advanced cohorts. PostHog Cloud is [free up to 1 million events per month](/pricing).

> 

Reviewer: CTA? 😅

Author: I want to keep this free of marketing CTAs etc, tbh.

**Related:** [In-depth PostHog vs Matomo comparison](/blog/posthog-vs-matomo)

### 3. Metabase
![Metabase - open source analytics tools](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/metabase-screenshot.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 34.9k
- **Category:** Dashboarding and business intelligence
- **Alternative to:** Looker, Tableau, Power BI
- **Languages:** Clojure (49%), JavaScript (33%), TypeScript (17%)
- [Metabase on Github](https://github.com/metabase/metabase)

#### What is Metabase?

> [Metabase](https://www.metabase.com/) is one of the most popular open-source business intelligence (BI) tools in the world, offering teams a way to visualize complex data and run analysis with no coding required. Instead, Metabase’s visual query builder enables you to create shareable dashboards in just a few minutes with a drag-and-drop interface — though a native SQL editor is available for advanced users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Metabase](https://www.metabase.com/) is one of the most popular open-source business intelligence (BI) tools, offering teams a way to visualize complex data and run analysis with no coding required. Instead, Metabase’s visual query builder enables you to create shareable dashboards in just a few minutes with a drag-and-drop interface — though a native SQL editor is available for advanced users.
```

#### Who is Metabase for?

> Metabase's drag-and-drop interface makes it accessible for technical and non-technical teams, making it an ideal platform for democratizing data analytics in organizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Metabase's drag-and-drop interface makes it accessible for technical and non-technical teams, making it an ideal platform for democratizing data analytics in organizations.
```

- Lightweight integration script won’t impact page performance
- No cookies required, GDPR compliant out of the box 

#### License and monetization
Plausible Analytics is available under a AGPLv3 license and can be self-hosted via Docker Compose. Pricing for its hosted version starts at €9 per month for 10,000 monthly pageviews.

> **Also consider:** Plausible is one of a large subset of privacy-first analytics products that have proven popular in the wake of GDPR and less permissive attitudes to user tracking. [Umami](https://umami.is/) is another popular, open-source product in this space. Read our [GDPR analytics guide](/blog/best-gdpr-compliant-analytics-tools) for more options.

### 5. Grafana
![Grafana - open source analytics tools](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/grafana-screenshot.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 58k
- **Category:** Dashboarding and data observability
- **Alternative to:** Datadog, Dynatrace 
- **Languages:** TypeScript (57%), Go (37%)
- [Grafana on GitHub](https://github.com/grafana/grafana)

> #### What is Snowplow?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What is Grafana?
```

> [Grafana](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/) is an open-source data observability platform. It focuses on interactive visualization, providing a wide variety of charts, graphs and alerts that can be connected to a wide range of online data sources. As a result, it’s a powerful system for monitoring and analyzing data in real-time.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Grafana](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/) is an open-source data observability platform. It focuses on interactive visualization, providing a wide variety of charts, graphs, and alerts that can be connected to a wide range of online data sources. As a result, it’s a powerful system for monitoring and analyzing data in real-time.  
```

#### Who is Grafana for?

> Grafana is an ideal choice for engineering, dev ops or data scientists in businesses or teams of any size, including enterprises, who need to observe and monitor data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Grafana is an ideal choice for engineering, DevOps, or data science teams in businesses of any size, including enterprises, who need to observe and monitor data.
```

#### Strengths

> - Great for tracking data in real time

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Great for tracking data in real time
```

- Multiple products allow you to scale
- Get alerts when anomalous events occur
- Integrates with a wide range of data sources

#### License and monetization

> Grafana is available to self-host under an AGPLv3 license. Grafana Cloud also has a free tier, though it's limited to three active users and 14 days retention. Additional tiers remove those limitations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Grafana is available to self-host under an AGPLv3 license. Grafana Cloud also has a free tier, though it's limited to three active users and 14 days retention. Additional tiers remove those limitations.
```

### 6. Umami

![umami analytics](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/umami.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 16.9k
- **Category:** Website analytics

> - **Alternative to:** Google Analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Alternative to:** Google Analytics, Plausible
```

> - **Languages:** 91% JavaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Languages:** 53% JavaScript, 39% TypeScript
```

- [Umami on GitHub](https://github.com/umami-software/umami)

#### What is Umami?

> [Umami](https://umami.is/) is another popular privacy-first website analytics tool. Like Plausible, it tracks basic website analytics, doesn't collect any personal information, and is extremely fast. You can also track basic events, such button clicks, using CSS classes or JavaScript. Unlike Plausible, it doesn't currently offer a cloud-hosted option, though one is in beta. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Umami](https://umami.is/) is another popular privacy-first website analytics tool. Like Plausible, it tracks basic website analytics, doesn't collect any personal information, and is extremely fast. On top of this, you can track basic events, such button clicks, using CSS classes or JavaScript. It also offers a free cloud hosting option.
```

- Doesn't collect any personally identifiable information
- Easy to self-host and configure

#### License and monetization

> Umami is available via an MIT license. There is no monetized features or hosting options at present, though it is currently running an open beta for managed cloud version that Umami will charge for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Umami is available via an MIT license. Their cloud hosted option is free up to 10k events per month, then starts at $9 per month for their "Pro" tier.
```

GrowthBook is distributed under an MIT license and self-hosted is supported at no cost. The cloud version is free for up to three users, and $20 per user per month thereafter. 

### 9. Redash
![Redash - open source analytics tools](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/redash.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 24.1k
- **Category:** Dashboarding and business intelligence
- **Alternative to:** Looker, Tableau, Power BI
- **Languages:** Python (41%), JavaScript (33%), TypeScript (17%)
- [Redash on GitHub](https://github.com/getredash/redash)

> ### What is Redash?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What is Redash?
```

#### Open source license and monetization

Apache Superset is distributed under an Apache-2.0 license. There are no paid features or tiers.

### 11. Countly
![Countly - open source analytics tools](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/countly-screenshot.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 5.3k
- **Category:** Product analytics
- **Alternative to:** Mixpanel, Amplitude, LogRocket
- **Languages:** JavaScript (82%), HTML (9.4%)
- [Countly on GitHub](https://github.com/Countly/countly-server)

#### What is Countly?

Like PostHog, [Countly](https://count.ly/) offers a wide range of tools to help you build better products. It has a strong focus on mobile and desktop applications, and enables you to bring together both qualitative and quantitative insights. However many features, such as dashboards, funnel analysis, and retention tracking are only available in the enterprise-level product.

#### Who is Countly for?

> Countly is suitable for both small teams and enterprise businesses, especially those which focus on mobile apps. The crash analytics tools make it useful for customer support and engineering teams, too. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Countly is suitable for both small teams and enterprise businesses, especially those which focus on mobile apps. The crash analytics tools make it useful for customer support and engineering teams, too. 
```

> #### Strengths

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Strengths

```

- Wide range of analysis tools
- Focus on mobile and desktop app development
- Crash analytics to diagnose bugs
- Run surveys to get qualitative insights

> #### Open source license and monetization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Open source license and monetization

```

Countly's Community Edition is available under a AGPLv3 license, but it's somewhat limited. It includes versions of its core analytics features, but customer behavior insights (e.g. retention, cohorts, funnels, user paths) are only available in the paid Enterprise Edition. Countly doesn't provide public pricing information.

### 12. Open Web Analytics

![open web analytics](../images/blog/open-source-analytics-tools/owa.png)

- **GitHub Stars:** 2.2k
- **Category:** Website analytics
- **Alternative to:** Google Analytics
- **Languages:** 67% PHP, 23% JavaScript
- [OWA on GitHub](https://github.com/Open-Web-Analytics/Open-Web-Analytics)

#### What is Open Web Analytics?

> [Open Web Analytics](https://www.openwebanalytics.com/) is an entirely free, open-source alternative to Google Analytics. In addition to usual web analytics basics, it includes a basic heatmap feature, and the ability to track clicks on all DOM elements. It's less focused on privacy than others in this list, so you can use OWA to track when users come back, and perform basic campaign and e-commerce tracking. In comparative terms, it's more advanced than Plausible and Umami, but less advanced than Matomo or PostHog, though the interface is somewhat dated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Open Web Analytics](https://www.openwebanalytics.com/) is an entirely free, open-source alternative to Google Analytics. In addition to usual web analytics basics, it includes a basic heatmap feature, and the ability to track clicks on all DOM elements. It's less focused on privacy than others in this list, so you can use it to track when users come back, and perform basic campaign and ecommerce tracking. 

In comparative terms, it's more advanced than Plausible and Umami, but less advanced than Matomo or PostHog, though the interface is somewhat dated. 
```

#### Who is Open Web Analytics for?

> OWA will suit any developer who wants self-hosted analytics, but desires more tracking capabilities than privacy-focused alternatives like Plausible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OWA suits developers who want self-hosted analytics, but desire more tracking capabilities than privacy-focused alternatives like Plausible.
```

#### Strengths

- Simple GDPR compliance
- Control over your own data
- Heatmap and DOM element tracking
- Basic campaign and e-commerce tracking

> #### Open source license and monetization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Open source license and monetization

```

> Open Web Analytics is distributed under the GPL-2.0 license. There are no paid features.

Reviewer: Some sort of conclusion? "You should choose PostHog!"

Author: Again, keeping this light on marketing lines.
